# BMW e46 cars (1999-2005 3-Series)

The CAN bus is not available at the OBD-II port, so it must be tapped into behind the dash.
The easiest places to do this are either behind the intrument cluster or at the steering angle sensor, 
which is located at the base of the steering column near the firewall.

A simple plug-in harness can be made by cutting both sides of this connector and a few inches of wiring 
from a donor car at the salvage yard.  Constant and switched power can also be found at this connector.

## Recommended CAN IDs:

Channel name | CAN ID | Equation | Notes
------------ | --- | -------- | -----
Accelerator position (%) | 809 | `F * 100 / 255` |
Brake position (%) | 809 | `G & 1 * 100` | Brake pressures are not available on the main CAN bus, so this is just an on/off signal from the brake switch.
Steering angle | 501 | `if(b & 0x80, 0 - ((b & 0x7f)<<8) | a, (b<<8) | a) * 0.04394` | Positive value = turning right. You can swap the equation in the if statement if you prefer it the other way around.
Speed | 339 | `bitsToUIntLe(raw, 11, 13) / 16 * 0.277778` | You may want to check the multiplier against an external GPS device, especially if running larger/smaller diameter tires
Engine RPM | 790 | `((D<<8) | C) / 6.4` |
Coolant temperature | 809 | `B * 0.75 - 48.373` |
Engine oil temperature | 1349 | `E - 48.373` |
Air temperature | 1557 | `D` |
Clutch position (%) | 809 | `D & 1 * 100` |
Fuel level (l) | 1555 | `C & 0x7f` |
Odometer | 1555 | `((B<<8) | A) *10000` |

Below is a table with a few more data channels that might be useful for more
detailed analysis. When adding more channels, be aware that it will increase
the file size of your RaceChrono sessions, and might negatively affect the
update rate of the more essential channels, due to limited Bluetooth bandwidth.
However, the communication protocol in RaceChrono is smart enough to optimize
Bluetooth usage if multiple channels share the same CAN ID. As a general rule,
if a new channel has the same CAN ID as an existing channel (such as "Throttle
position" using the same CAN ID 320 as "Accelerator position"), then adding it
should not affect the update rates. Adding a channel based on a new CAN ID (such
as "Wheel speed FL") will likely affect the update rates of all other channels.

Channel name | CAN ID | Equation | Notes
------------ | --- | -------- | -----
Wheel speed FL | 496 | `bitsToUIntLe(raw, 0, 12) / 16 * 0.277778` | Use same multiplier as for "Speed".
Wheel speed FR | 496 | `bitsToUIntLe(raw, 16, 12) / 16 * 0.277778` | Use same multiplier as for "Speed".
Wheel speed RL | 496 | `bitsToUIntLe(raw, 32, 12) / 16 * 0.277778` | Use same multiplier as for "Speed".
Wheel speed RR | 496 | `bitsToUIntLe(raw, 48, 12) / 16 * 0.277778` | Use same multiplier as for "Speed".